QMAIL_LDAP by Andre Oppermann <opi@nrg4u.com>,
Claudio Jeker <jeker@n-r-g.com> and Boris Lutz <lutz@n-r-g.com>
(c) 1999-2004 Internet Business Solutions AG

RELEASE: $Date: 2005/04/01 14:10:30 $ ($Revision: 1.214 $)


This is the NEWS FILE, so the QLDAPINSTALL file gets a bit cleaner.
This file is NOT structured!!

TODO:

 see QLDAPTODO

WARNING: If you are upgrading from 20030801a or earlier make sure that
         you have read the news section for 20030901.

NEWS for current stuff:

 Enable logging in qmail-verify. It is not perfect but far better than
 before.

 Correctly escape the AUTH= extension according to RFC2554 in xtext form.
 Initial idea and problem found by Aiko Barz.

 Add -t type option to digest to specify a specific algorithm to be used.
 This makes digest usable for scripting.

 Correctly parse multiline ~control/ldapserver files. OpenLDAP seems to
 be a bit finically about what it accepts.

 Use correct original sender address if using one of the qmail-secretary
 modes -- like the moderator support of qmail-group. Previously all bounces
 were sended to the moderator okey-ing a message.

 Fix bug in the EHLO response parser of qmail-remote. Looks like authentication
 only worked on TLS encrypted sessions. Reported by Amol Kulkarni.

 Use SSL_CTX_use_certificate_chain_file() instead of
 SSL_CTX_use_certificate_file() to load the TLS certificates. With this it
 is possible to load the complete certificate chain instead of just the first
 one. Idea and patch by Michel Minsoul.

NEWS for 20041201 stuff:

 Introduce a better extension handling to qmail-group. Qmail-group will now
 only deliver mails if they are sent to the main address. This should fix
 possible mail-loops. Also the extension -moderators is now supported and
 mails to that email will be sent to all moderators.

 Introduce the new qmailGroup ldap attribute "bounceadmin". Bounceadmin is a
 list of rfc822 mail addresses where delivery errors are sent to. If no
 bounceadmin is specified then the original sender of the mail will be used.

 qmail-reply sends mail with empty envelope sender as it does not make sense
 to get bounces for automatic replies. Prodded by Andre who had over 1000
 failure notices after his vacation.

 Only update the qmail-reply recent sent db if we would send a mail to this
 user. Before every sender was added to the db and caused massive trashing.

 Bugfix in qmail-group to make filtermember/filtersender work when
 membersonly is turned on. Previously users specified via a filter where
 always considered not member of the group. Reported by Flavio Fonseca.

 Fix qmail-group so that senderconfirm and moderation can be used togehter.
 This fixes a problem where qmail-secretary detected a mail loop when both
 options where used.  Reported by George Lekatsas.

 Source ~control/{aliasempty,defaultdelivery} with cat instead of head -1
 so it is possible to define more than just a simple ./Maildir/ delivery
 as default. Found by Michel H.

NEWS for 20041101 stuff:

 Don't forget to check also for accountStatus deleted in the auth tools and
 deny access in this case.

 Only send the AUTH option in MAIL FROM: if the session is authenticated.
 Fixes a problem seen with some obscure mail server.

NEWS for 20040801 stuff:

 In qmail-smtpd if SSLCERT is set use this as the path to the certificate and
 not as the path to a file containing the path to the certificate. Noticed by
 Zachary Kotlarek.

 Fix a security bug in the startup scripts. qmail-smtpd is run under the
 user $USER. If $USER was set on invocation of the script, the value was not
 reset to the default qmaild. In the worst-case qmail-smtpd was running as
 root. Yikes! To install the new script you need to remove the old one before
 make setup check. Also affected are the qmail-pbsdbd and qmail-qmqpd
 run-scripts.

 Fix a bug in smtp_auth handling where empty password caused a disconnect.
 Noticed by Fabio Gomes.

 Fix multiple bugs in qmail-smtps starttls handling. Noticed by Ted Zlatanov.

NEWS for 20040701 stuff:

 qmail-smtpd log level cleanup. Add a additional level for accounting and
 remove some redundant messages.

 Fix a bug in checkpassword.c that caused auth_pop and auth_imap to ignore
 the per user quota if rebind was used. Reported by nbari at unixmexico.com

 Add ~control/remotecert for qmail-remote similar to ~control/smtpcert
 for qmail-smtpd. The big difference is that qmail-remote will use STARTTLS
 and SSL encryption even without this file as a certificate is optional for
 the client side. 

 To enable SMTP STARTTLS the path to the cert file needs to be set in
 ~control/smtpcert or set via the env var SSLCERT.

 If the defaultdelivery aka aliasempty is not a local delivery qmail-local
 may start additional programs while running qmail-reply. Reported by
 Florian Pflug.

 Fix the SIGHUP handling between qmail-send and qmail-local.

 Messages sent from a moderator to a group only need to be approved by the
 moderator himself.

 qmail-todo started to spin if qmail-send exited non nicely (aka crashed).

 Fix some path and 'sh' issues in the run scripts reported by Toni Mueller 
 and Ted Zlatanov. While doing that add some ssl run scripts.

 Fix QUOTATRASH option by including LDAPFLAGS to the maildir++.o target.
 Reported by Zachary Denison.

 Replaced the cdb functions with the public domain mmaped version from
 tcpserver. This makes it possible to keep the file open and do extremly
 fast searches.

 Add license to files that are under our (Andre or mine) copyright. At least
 it is now clear what is our stuff and what is coming from djb.

NEWS for 20040401 stuff:

 Added some qmail-group docu. See QLDAPGROUP.

 Better 550GREETING support and added an additional 421GREETING mode to
 qmail-smtpd.

 Qmail-secretary should ignore mails with precedence set to list, junk or bulk.

 Added Bruce Guenters qmail-qmqpc connect timeout patch.

 Add SMTP AUTH support to qmail-remote. A user can be specified via
 ~control/smtproutes. To authenticate all mails to inside.af.mil with
 user joe-user something like this can be used.
   inside.af.mil:firewall.af.mil joe-user eat@joe's

 Don't let qmail-group or qmail-secretary inject mails with no recipients.

 Print remote IP address in error messages for RBL rejects and denied
 relaying attempts to make debugging based on the bounce messages far
 easier.  Requested by Jason Eggleston.

NEWS for 20040301 stuff:

 Fix buffer overflow noticed by Georgi Guninski in qmail-qmtpd.c.
 There is no easy way to exploit it. Additionally the same issue is
 patched in qmail-qmqpd.c.

 Fix an issue in qmail-remote.c with TLSDEBUG defined. Noticed by
 Oskar Eyb and Rainer Hartenthaler.

 Fix bugs in qmail-group. The moderation feature was broken and in some
 header fields a char of the local address was chopped of. Noticed by
 different people.

 Fix endless loop in qmail-ldaplookup noticed by Tomas Kuliavas.

 Fix bug in substdio_feed noticed by Stefan Paletta.

 Fix qmail-inject -f "" bug noticed by Mesa de Ayuda.

 Added LDAPFLAG -DBIND_8_COMPAT needed on systems with new incompatible
 bind9 header files. Currently this is necessary on MacOS X 10.3.

 Disable the too generic zip blocker signature in the example signature file.

NEWS for 20040201 stuff:

 Yet another bug fix in the maildirmake code of auth_mod.c. The previous fix
 was definitifly not strong enough,

 Bug fix in condwrite. The maildir child should not exit 99 on finish the
 parent should exit 99 and the child 0.

 In qmail-smtpd limit the accepted text line lenght to 10000 characters.
 The RFC proposes a maximum of a 1000 but be nice to broken MTA/MUAs and it
 does not really hurt us.

 Enhanced qmail-smtpd execcheck. Basic idea is form Russel Nelsons
 qmail-smtpd-viruscan-1.3 patch. MIME signatrues are now stored in the control
 file ~control/signatures. Two enhancements where done to Russels patch.
 First MIME forwarded messages are also completly scanned and secondly it is
 possible to use a '*' in the signature as a anymatch character. This makes
 the signatures more powerful.

 It is now possible to limit the allowed senders to a qmail-group with
 dnsender, rfc822sender and filtersender similar to dnmember, rfc822member
 and filtermember. If membersonly is enabled and one of those sender attributes
 is used only mails comming form this list of senders are passed to the group.

 Ensure qmail-remote does not print the DDC percentage in error messages.

 Add auto maildirmake capability to qmail-secretary.

 qmail-verify, auth_smtp, qmail-group and qmail-ldaplookup only try to read
 ~control/ldaplogin and ~control/ldappassword. If one of the files can not be
 read use anonymous login or the alternate login credentials in case of
 qmail-group and qmail-ldaplookup. 

 Yet another cleanup round through the whole code. Fix many issues with integer
 overflows inclusive the qmail-smtpd crash found by Georgi Guninski.
 While doing that rename puts and log to putstr and logit so that it does not
 conflict with gcc internals.

 Bugfix in auth_mod.c reported by em (at) cmla.ens-cachan.fr

 Yet another run script update. $ALIASEMPTY fix from Jo Geraerts and correct
 $QMAIL idea from Ace Suares.

 Do the same game in Makefile.cdb. Prepend %QMAIL%/bin infront of qmail-cdb.

 Fix typo in qmail-secretary. Reported by Beni Schoedler.

NEWS for 20040101 stuff:

 Never fdcopy STDOUT with STDERR in qmail-popup. The copy was only skipped if
 DEBUG was set. So it was not possible to use qmail-pop3d accounting/logging
 if a non-DEBUG version was compiled. Report by Henning Brauer.

 Once again I missed something in the run scripts. It would be good to run
 awk scripts with awk. Remember to remove the old run scripts before a
 make setup check.

 Kill the qmail-verify zombies in qmail-smtps call infrastructure. Reported
 by Kevin J. McCarthy.

 auth_pop and auth_imap used always the default quota settings because
 the quota attributes for the ldap search where missing. Thanks to Ricardo
 Cerqueira for the report.

 The envdir parsing in the runscripts was absolutly broken. First of
 all I used a C-Style comentary in a shell script and then the simple
 eval `env - envdir ./env env` does not work with environments with
 spaces. So this was exchanged through a simple awk script. Fixed some
 other runscript bogons too.
 To install the new run scripts the old ones need to be removed `rm
 /var/qmail/boot/*/run`

NEWS for 20031201 stuff:

 Do not overwrite rules file on new install (make setup check).

 Make it possible to specify the number of concurrent connection of tcpserver
 controlled daemons (qmail-smtpd, qmail-qmqpd, qmail-pop3d, qmail-imapd).
 This can be achived by setting the CONCURRENCY environment variable.

 qmail-reply does no longer reply to messages tagged with a spamassassin
 "X-Spam-Status: Yes" header.

 The dynamic data compression done in qmail-qmqpd can be explicitly disabled.
 If the environment variable NOCOMPRESS is set the feature is disabled.

 Sending a SIGHUP reloads now also the qmail-lspawn config. Sending a
 SIGHUP directly to qmail-lspawn is no longer supported. qmail-send sends
 upon receipt of a SIGHUP a empty message with delivery number 0xBEEF (48879)
 to the qmail-lspawn process. This may cause trouble if you have a concurrency
 bigger than this. The code should work even with higher values but I'm not
 able to test this.

 qmail-reply should clear the database if the reply text changes. So that
 you get a new message after the change.

 Fix in check.c:sanitypathcheckb(). Until now .. where not allowed in a
 path. Now we check for the real thing(tm) "/../" and "^../".

 Case sensitivity bug fix when using locals.cdb. While constmap uses case
 insensitive compares cdb doesn't, this will cause trouble when using local.cdb
 and the envelope recipient has uppercase letters in the domain part.
 Thanks to Doug Council for the report.

 Do not touch "down" files in service dirs on install else we would disable a
 already enabled service without the knowledge of the user.

NEWS for 20031101a stuff:

 Nasty bugfix in qmail-qmqpd with compression turned on. On slow links large
 mails could cause a transmission error.

 Minor bug fixes in passwd.c, qmail-remote.c, qmail-smtpd.c and rcpthosts.c.
 Thanks Toni Mueller, Vicente Aguilar and Neil Sequeira for the reports.

NEWS for 20031101 stuff:

 Basic daemontool run scripts installed in ~/boot. qmail-ldap installs now
 daemontools run script for most services in ~/boot. A Makefile for cdb
 updating is installed in ~control.

 locals and rcpthosts can now be stored as cdb. This makes morercpthost.cdb
 superfluous, also the hupping of qmail-send if the locals.cdb file changes
 is no longer neccesary. If locals.cdb is present locals is ignored respectively
 if rcpthosts.cdb is present rcpthosts and morercpthosts.cdb are ignored.

 Important bug fix: if you removed rcpthosts, qmail-ldap became a open relay.
 This is stock qmail behaviour but since we include locals in our rcpthost
 check this old assumption is wrong. We also consider the stock qmail behaviour
 as a design flaw because a mta should never be a open relay unless the 
 luser want's so.

 readwrite cleanup. Similar to other djb ware we wrap read() and write()
 into the functions subread() and subwrite(). This solves the 64-bit troubles
 with read and write. read() and write() should no longer be used together with
 the substdio framework.

 Huge cleanup. Bring qmail into the 21st century. Define all prototypes
 and include the needed system include files. This commit fixes about 99%
 of all compiler warnings and makes code developing lesser error-prone.
 The Makefile dependencies need to be updated to reflect reality.
 A few errors are still in the tree which are either hard to solve or
 considered harmless -- mainly return type of main() in a few helper apps.
 This cleanup brought some strange bugs to light which are now fixed.

 Finally enabled the "send only one reply to each sender" feature
 in qmail-reply.

 Critical bugfix in auth_imap.c. A bug in the function that should invoke
 the next authmodule caused auth_imap to end up in one infinit loop.

 Add DUPEALIAS feature. When duplicate or overlapping mail or
 mailAlternateAddress exist the mail will be forwarded to this local
 user (like the alias user of qmail). It can be either bounced or
 handled there with a script/program answering with some meaningful
 reply. This compile time option is intended for migration of old
 X.400 mail systems where a user was available under some short names
 if nobody else had the same shortname.

 Add some more features to qmail-ldaplookup. Password compare works now.
 It is now also possible to use a different binddn and bindpw.
 What is missing are local /etc/passwd lookups and group handling.

 The objectclass of a group object can now be changed like all other ldap
 values via qmail-ldap.h.

 Fix in the qmail schema definitions: a ')' was missing.

NEWS for 20031001 stuff:

 Change NOPOP in accountStatus to NOACCESS as it is not just disabling
 pop access but also imap and possibly others.

 ~control/ldapserver is now read with control_readfile. Multiple servers
 now have to be specified at one per line. Using # for comments is allowed
 and empty lines are removed.

 qmail-smtpd now reads ~control/locals and merges this with ~control/rcpthosts.
 It is no longer neccessary to list a domain in both files. Anything listed
 in locals is now automatically accepted by qmail-smtpd. rcpthosts is only
 used and needed for domains we have to do spooling for.

 New compile time option IGNOREVERISIGN to disable dns wildcard matches
 on gtlds. With this the return mx check will work again with .com domains.
 This version can also handle multiple A records. A big hurray to verisign
 who added this broken feature to the internet.

 Added auth_smtp and AUTH capabilities to qmail-smtpd. Enabled via the 
 SMTPAUTH env var. If SMTPAUTH is set to TLSREQUIRED it is neccesairy to
 do a STARTTLS before issuing an AUTH command. If AUTHREQUIRED is set any
 user MUST successfully authenticate before issuing a MAIL FROM command.
 The string in the env var AUTHPREPEND will be prepended to the userid in
 the received line.

 New tool qmail-verify which is used for email address verification. See
 next two new features.

 smtp recipient verify. This qmail-smtpd feature will look up every RCPT TO
 address in ldap with qmail-verify to check the recipients existance. If it
 does not exist, qmail-smtpd will answer directly with a 550 reply instead
 of accepting the email and bouncing it later. Only addresses whose domain
 part is listed in ~control/locals are checked (because only there we know
 the definite answer). Relaying and rcpthosts works as before, recipient is
 not checked for those. Addresses listed in new ~control/goodmailaddr will
 be accepted in any case. This is very useful for important or special
 (like postmaster or mail admin) addresses which must work under any
 circumstances (or local addresses which are not in ldap). Enabled with
 RCPTCHECK env var.

 smtp sender verify. This qmail-smtpd feature will look up every MAIL FROM
 address in ldap with qmail-verify to check the senders existance. If it
 does not exist, qmail-smtpd will reject with 550 reply. In normal mode
 only (envelope) senders whose domain part is listed in ~control/locals
 are checked. Otherwise no-one else from outside could send mail to local
 users anymore. In mode LOOSE it will only allow verified sender plus any
 sender with its domain listed in ~control/rcpthosts. In STRICT mode it
 will allow only ldap verified senders. With this you can, for example,
 enforce that users within your network must use a valid sender which
 exists in ldap and no other. Addresses listed in new ~control/goodmailaddr
 will be accepted in any case. This is very useful for important or special
 (like postmaster or mail admin) addresses which must work under any circum-
 stances (or local addresses which are not in ldap). Enabled with SENDERCHECK
 env var.

 550greeting to reject smtp connections right away in the smtp
 greeting message. Use this to permanently reject all messages coming
 from a particular ip address(range).

 smtpclustercookie feature for (large) smtp MX clusters behind load
 balancers or NAT devices. The cookie is presentented in the smtp
 greeting as last string before \r\n. qmail-remote compares the
 cookie with it's own and if they match assumes that the message
 is looping. Cookies are set in ~control/smtpclustercookie. Length
 is limited to 32 characters. Fill with some random printable chars.

 qmail-smtpd now prints its hostname (~control/me) along with QP
 when acking a message. Makes it easier to track which smtp MX cluster
 member took the message.

 qmail-smtpd greeting restructured due to the above things. It now
 prints "220 [~control/me] ESMTP [~control/smtpgreeting] [~control/
 smtpclustercookie]\r\n". You don't have to put the hostname of the
 machine into smtpgreeting anymore. It is just a text. Can be empty.

 qmail-qmqpd supports now both clear and ZLIB compressed communications
 for intra-cluster forwards.

 Added new tool condwrite. Works like condredirect but writes to a maildir
 or mailfile instead of forwarding. The quota is respected and maildir are
 created automatic if option is set. NOTE: The automatic maildir creation
 is not capable to create valid IMAP subdirs (Maildir/.somedir).

 auth_* sets now the MAILDIRQUOTA and DATASIZE environment vars.

 New compile time option QUOTATRASH to include the Trash in the quota
 calculation. The courier-imap secification tells explicitly to ignore
 .Trash but in the last few weeks I had to find out that the courier
 documentation should not be respected, because courier does not respect
 it either.

 qmail-reply will no longer send replies to mails tagged with a X-RBL header.
 This should dramaticaly reduce reply bounces if used with the proper RBL.

 Announce the EHLO STARTTLS option only if tls is compiled, enabled and
 we have found a valid certificate in ~control/cert.pem for encryption.

 Modernize qmail startup infratructure. First step is to redo the ~boot
 directory and to add ~log directory. Create subdirs for qmail, qmail-smtpd,
 qmail-qmqpd, qmail-pop3d, qmail-imapd and qmail-pbsd for supervise and
 multilog.  Corresponding run files will come in the next release.

 Fix bug in qmail-smtp addrparse function. If "mail from" or "rcpt to" did
 neither contain a '<' nor a ':' the function returned a nullsender (bounce)
 or recipient instead of a syntax error. This bug is also present in stock
 qmail-1.03.

 The copyloop used to forward pop3 and imap session can be simplified.
 Neither pop3 nor imap are protocols which support half close so dump this
 stuff. Half closing those forwarding sessions could be used as a DOS attack.

 qmail-todo could end in an infinite loop if qmail-send died before sending
 the synchronization flag. This can happen if qmail-lspawn died because of
 a missing control file.

 Print the dynamic data compression message in qmail-remote only if compressed
 data was sent. Otherwise we get some junk number.

 Fixing clustering. The cluster forwarding was broken during the rewrite
 (20030901).

 Fix error handling of qmail-quotawarning startup in qmail-local.

 Bug fix in qldap_get_status reported by <krits at home dot pl>.

 Removed some unneccesary verbositiy in qmail-secretary.

 Bug fix in the maildir string creation. A specified count value will over-
 write any size settings. Thanks to Neil Sequeira for reporting this issue.

 SHADOWLIBS added in the digest link rule.

 bug fix in auth_imap. courier-imap login program which is invoking
 auth_imap did not adhere to its own specs and sends too much stuff.


NEWS for 20030901 stuff:

 WARNING: This release is NOT fully backwards compatible! We have made
 certain changes for clarity and cleanup.

 qmail-group added. This tool handles mailing groups stored in ldap. Members
 can be defined as rfc822 addresses, via dn entries and via ldap filters.
 qmail-group can restrict mails togheter with qmail-secretary. So it is
 possible to moderate a list, to restrict the sender to be a list member or
 to confirm each message (qsecretary).

 qmail-ldaplookup has been rewritten. Not all functionality of the old tool
 has been integrated yet. It is now possible to use search filters and to
 show multiple entries.
 
 Removed some qmail-smtpd control files (tarpitcount/delay, maxrcptcount,
 rblonlyheader). The only and right way to set them is environment variables
 with tcpserver.

 Changed deliveryMode significantly. Before the setting of a forwarding
 would have disabled local delivery. This is no longer the case. Each of
 the modes has to be explicitly disabled (local, forward, program) or
 enabled (reply). There are no longer contradicting modes which makes it
 much more logical.
 This change probably has a great impact on many administrative frontends!

 Quota definitions are new format only. ~control/ldapdefaultquota and mailQuota
 serve no meaning anymore. Also the string quota format (10000S,100C) is no
 longer supported. Use ~control/defaultquota[size|count] and mailQuotaSize
 and mailQuotaCount instead.

 New tool qmail-secretary. This is the swiss army knife for mail group and
 mailing list handling. It is used by the upcoming qmail-group tool but has
 a compatibility modus for ezmlm (you may guess why ...).

 New tool qmail-forward. This tool forwards a mail via qmail-qmqpc in a
 much nicer way than qmail-lspawn befor. Some more or less ugly hacks could
 be removed.

 qmail-reply recent sender support finished. The code is still disabled
 via NOTYET defines until I verified it.

 The mailheader magic of qmail-reply is now also supported by qmail-ldaplookup
 and qmail-secretary.

 Fixed some problems with text control files, mainly quotawarning and
 custombouncetext. Trailing white spaces and empty lines are no longer
 cleared.

 Rewrite of the homedirmake and maildirmake feature. Finaly auth_imap will
 create the maildir for courier.

 The environments passed between qmail-lspawn and qmail-local are now ':'
 seperated and escaped. Nota bene the old csv stile definition of some
 attributes mainly deliveryMode is still supported (the ',' are replaced
 by ':' automagically).

 major cleanup in qmail-lspawn ldap handling and exit-code handling code.
 Also the forwarding code has been moved out so that this code is no longer
 run under root.

 NOPBS environment variable can now be used to disable pbsadd. This is useful
 for nat-ed customers or if you have some local port forwarding and absolutly
 neccessary for clusters (NOPBS set for all clusterhost IPs).

 Integration for pbs tools in cluster environments. auth_* has a switch -d
 to specify pbsadd or a other tool that is executed in all success cases be
 it local access or session forwarding. The old way via chaning the processes
 still works for non cluster setups.

 new auth_pop, auth_imap and checkpassword implementation. The files are
 now better seperated so that it should be possible to implement auth_smtp
 without copying most of the auth* code. It is now possible to run the auth_*
 tools without root priviledges and root priviledges are dropped as soon as
 possible.

 Salted versions of SHA and MD5 (SSHA and SMD5) implemented and major cleanup
 of the hole passwd compare functions. The digest tool has been rewritten to
 support the new algorithms and to support passwd verifying. Also the base64
 and digest_* implementations have been cleaned up and stripped.

 new and better structured ldap backend. This solves many issues we had
 with the old hackish implementation. These are: functioning rebind, support
 for multiple concurrent connections, more flexible support for ldap attribute
 handling and upcomming filter functions that can handle mutliple results.

 compile time option to enable ZLIB compression for QMQP cluster communication.
 This is useful when cluster hosts are in different locations and have slow
 or metered connections between them. All QMQP client/servers need to be
 support the dynamic data compression, stock QMQP and compressed QMQP are
 unable to understand each other. This may change for the server but not for the
 client.  Enable in Makefile with -DQMQP_COMPRESSION switch.

 cleaned up qmail.schema and added qmailGroup objectclass for mail groups.

 major cleanup, actually a huge cleanup, currently over 75 modified, removed
 or added files. The code is now much more modularized and protable.

NEWS for 20030801 stuff:

 Removed checking of client certificates from TLS in qmail-smtpd. It is
 no longer possible to allow automatic relaying via TLS client certs.
 TLS functionality for transport is not affected and continues to be
 fully functional.

 Some cleanup and clarification in smtpd and rbl logging.

 Added Russell Nelsons antivirus patch for qmail-smtpd.
 Compile qmail-ldap with the -DSMTPEXECCHECK option and turn it on with
 the REJECTEXEC environment variable.

 Added qmail-queue patch. Compile-time option via -DALTQUEUE.

 On-the-fly SMTP session data compression via ESMTP DATAZ extension.
 Saves a damn lot of bandwidth. This is currently draft. See
 draft-oppermann-smtp-datacompression-00.txt.

 Bug fix in Makefile (qmail-todo dependencies).

 Better handling of SMTP mail-parameters mainly SIZE. Until now only the first
 mail-parameter was used all others where ignored. Also specially escaped
 or quoted mail addresses could result in strange outcomes.

 New control/rbllist parser, it is no longer needed to use one tab as
 separator. Lines starting with a # are comments and will be ignored.

 New delivery mode noforward to disable all forwarding entries in ldap
 and .qmail. The deliveryMode attributes need some major overhaul becasue
 we have a few modes -- manly forwardonly, noforward, localdelivery,
 normal and nombox -- that are exclusive. Anyway for now this should make
 life a bit easier.

 qmail-remote tries now higher MX servers if the previous server temporary
 fails in the HELO/EHLO command exchange. >=500 errors result in a delivery
 error.

NEWS for 20030501 stuff:

 gcc bug fix for OpenBSD sparc64 in digest_sha.c

 Better copy loop in checkpasswords imap/pop3 forwarding this should solve
 problems with large file downloads over imap.

 Remove duplicate entries from pbsdbd cache, this should solve the "hash
 flodding" error message.

 Bug fix in rbl.c from Sami Farin.

 Bad handling of return values. Per RFC a EHLO may return a 500, 502 or 
 perhaps a 504. In this case retry with HELO.
 Update: Some servers send some non RFC compliant error code so retry
 with HELO in all cases.

NEWS for 20030401 stuff:

 Added big todo patch. Enable with -DBIGTODO in Makefile.

 qmail-remote has a better look at the return codes of the helo/ehlo command.
 This gives a better error handling in case of server that refuse the
 connection with a >500 error in the begining.

 qmail-local bug fix in .qmail parser (missing () around a ||).

 Be more careful with closedir(). It is possible that the dirp is NULL.

 Nasty bug fix in qmail-qmqpc.c. Due to this it was impossible to use 
 qmail-qmqpc.

NEWS for 20030301 stuff:

 qmail-showctl updated so that all new control files are listed.

 qmail-remote and qmail-qmqpc are now capable to bind to a specified port
 for outgoing connections. You can use control/outgoingip and control/qmqpcip
 to set the ip.

 For ISP that need to implement some surveillance method because of some
 beloved authoroties (like here in switzerland), we added the
 BIGBROTHER switch. This enables a per address queue extra feature.
 Just put a key pair like badguy@badplace.ch:bigbrother@admin.ch in
 ~control/bigbrother to automaticaly forward all mail to or from
 badguy to bigbrother. bigbrother can be a local, ldap or remote address.

 Bug fix in qmail-local: flagforwardonly was set to 0 instead of 1 if 
 deliverymode was forwardonly.

 Bug fix in maildir++ code: At two places a closedir was missing. Thanks to
 Reinin Oyama.

 Bug fix because of a gratuitous recycling of a var in qmail-quotawarn if
 the DOTMODE_NONE was used. Thanks to Chris Maxwell.

 Don't print extended received header if the needed infos are not available.
 This is for qmtp receives. Idea by Chris L. Mason.

 Many bug fixes and enhancements in the NOTYET code of qmail-reply, inspired
 by Neil Sequeira.

NEWS for 20030101 stuff:

 Retry the ldap_bind with LDAPv2 if ldap_bind fails with LDAP_PROTOCOL_ERROR.
 This solves a problem with OpenLDAP > 2.0 client libs and a OpenLDAP 1.2
 Server. Inspired by Henning Brauer.

 New qmail-reply program. Now it is possible to define a header section
 with %HEADER%. With this change it is possible to define special Content-type
 and Content-Transfer-Encodings.

 Bug fix in qmail-lspawn: LDAP_MAXMSIZE = 0 should be eq unlimited.
 Thanks to Henning Brauer.

 Finally added pop3d logging similar to the smtpd logging.

 Added the badmailfrom-unkown feature from Maex (via Henning Brauer).

 Added a fix in qmail-ldaplookup.c. Thanks to Kosh Naranek for the report.
 
NEWS for 20021201a stuff:

 Hot fix in qmail-local. If no quota was specified accounts with mailforwarding
 didn't work.
 
 Close directory file handle in pbsadd and pbscheck.

 Nicer exit behaviour in qmail-todo (exit 0 if no error encountered).

 Add caseIgnoreIA5SubstringsMatch for mailAlternateAddress in qmail.schema.
 
NEWS for 20021201 stuff:

 On exit qmail-todo behaves now like qmail-[rl]spawn and stays alive
 until qmail-send exits. All zombies have been slayered.

 On a -HUP qmail-send rereads more ~control files. Now bouncemaxbytes,
 custombouncetext, locals and virtualdomains are reloaded.

 There seems to be a tiny bug in qmail-1.03 qmail-clean program. Fixed.

 Renamed QMAILQUOTA to MAILDIRQUOTA to work better with maildrop.

 Bug fix in qldap-ldaplib.c, when the ldap lookup timed out the wrong error
 was returned.

 Minor bug fixes in the pbs tools inspired by Junjiro Okajima.

 Don't use NULL in maildir++.c because it is often not defined.

NEWS for 20021101 stuff:

 New ldap fields added:
 - mailQuotaSize and mailQuotaCount replace the cryptic mailQuota string.
   mailQuotaSize specifies the maximum size in bytes and mailQuotaCount
   is the maximum number of messages allowed.
   Note: the old mailQuota string is still valid and used if neither 
         mailQuotaSize nor mailQuotaCount are set.
 - mailSizeMax specifies the maximum size of a single message the user may
   receive. e.g. Dial-up customer prefer a small mailSizeMax.
   Note: mailSizeMax is used in qmail-lspawn whereas databytes sets the
         SMTP DATA limit. Therefor having a mailSizeMax bigger than databytes
         does not make much sense.
 The old mailQuota way of doing things is still supported.

 Fixed some bugs and cleand up maildir++.c. The maildirsize parser is now
 rock solid and does no longer freak out when lines start with spaces as in
 the newer courier-imap releases.

 quota_check() returns now also percentages over 100% (if over quota) and
 the percentages calculation does not overflow with sizes over 40MB.
 NOTE: quotas with sizes of around 4GB may overflow if large mails are
 delivered and so the maildir size may get far over quota. This is a bug
 and will get fixed somewhen (switch to 64bit quota numbers).

 maildir++ quota API cleanup. quota_recalc() works now exactly like
 quota_calc().

 In qmail.schema 'ProgramDeliveryPath' was incorrectly specified as 
 SINGLE-VALUE. Thanks to <andreas.schulze@web.de> for finding it.

NEWS for 20021001 stuff:

 Corrected qmail.schema contributed by Mike Jackson.

 Documentation bug in POPBEFORESMTP fixed.

 Add LDAPv3 protocol support.

 Synchronize the external processor qmail-todo with qmail-send on startup.
 There was a race condition on startup which caused some mails to be deliverd
 twice.

 In both auth_* tools the forwarding code was only sending a CR instead of
 the needed CRLF.

 Little fixes in the pbs tools.

NEWS for 20020901 stuff:

 Fixed bugs in pbscheck and pbsadd which caused unexpected behaviour if
 multiple servers where specified.

 Fixed multiple bugs in maildir++ quota handling.
   bug in read5120(), if open failed it could cause a loop.
   bug with handling of subdirectories (path concatenation).
   bug with interpretation of quota strings for courier 0C means
   no files allowed whereas for qmail-ldap it was unlimited.

 Fixed some spelling errors.
 
 Bugfix in auth_imap. The procedure for failed logons had a bug.

NEWS for 20020801 stuff:

 Fixed an error in the patch file.

NEWS for 20020701 stuff:

 Fix in qmail-reply: the wrong Return-Path was set because an interference of
 qmail-locals environment and qmail-injects use of it. ($USER is used in
 the Return-Path)

 In both auth_* tools the forwarding code was sending LFCR instead of CRLF.

 Fix buffer overflow in qmail-quotawarn.c. I changed the filename generation
 without resizing the file name buffers, shame on me. 
 NOTE: This overflow can not be exlpoited.

 better handling of virtual/ldap .qmail handling.
 The ldap .qmail arguments are now exected in the following way:
   1. reply (deliveryMode: reply)
   2. delivery programs (deliveryProgramPath)
   3. forwards (mailForwardingAddress)
   4. localdeliver (deliveryMode: localdelivery)
 So it is possible to use a filter delivery program or other more complex
 delivery options.

NEWS for 20020501a stuff:

 bounce messages are now qsbmf-compliant, wether custombouncetext is set or
 not. Note that you may not have blank lines in custombouncetext.
 Thanks to Henning Brauer for the patch and to Mike Jackson <mjj@pp.fi> for
 the report.

 The pop-before-smtp tools now support transaction of additional environment
 variables. See POPBEFORESMTP for more info.

 Use real rfc822 timestamps and more Maildir stile filename in qmail-quotawarn. 
 This should fix order problems in mailclients.

NEWS for 20020501 stuff:

 ****** ATTENTION the format of ~control/rbllist has changed, see ******
        QLDAPINSTALL for information about the new rbllist file.

 Major overhaul of qmail-smtpd. Completely restructured anti-spam stuff and
 replaced DENYMAIL environment variable (settable through tcpserver) with:
  - SMTP550DISCONNECT to disconnect the smtp session immediatly after a fatal
    5xx error
  - NOBOUNCE to reject null sender bounces
  - SANITYCHECK to reject messages without @, no . in TLD, too short/long TLD
  - RETURNMXCHECK to check if the sender has an MX
  - BLOCKRELAYPROBE to block rcptto containing !%@ before @ from Russell Nelson
  - RBL to check RBLs
  - RBLONLYHEADER to only add a X-RBL header

 added bouncemaxbytes patch:
 to turn it on write the amount of bytes to bounce in the file 
 ~control/bouncemaxbytes.
 Work inspired and mostly copied from Frank DENIS aka Jedi/Sector One.

 Bug fix in qmail-send.c log handling:
 If in one read a log entry and a delivery status notification was delivered the
 status notification was dropped and therefor qmail-send did not close the job.

 qmail-remote supports the smtp size extension as specified by rfc 1870.
 If the EHLO extension size is set qmail-remote sends size in the mail from
 commando. It does not parse the EHLO size argument to check if the size is
 OK, the remote smtp server should decide if it is OK.

 clean up in qmail-remote, the starttls option was not compared in a case
 independend way as defined in rfc 2821. The tls debug option is now called
 TLSDEBUG.

 added Russ Nelson patch to qmail-remote to send using QMTP.
 From his patch:
  This patch to qmail-remote causes it to attempt qmtp first if the MX priority
  indicates so.  Read http://cr.yp.to/proto/mxps.txt for more information.
  If you want this qmail-remote to be able to send email to you using qmtp,
  then you should be running a qmtpd on port 209, and you should have your
  lowest MX priority be 12801.

 added pop-before-smtp tools (see POPBEFORESMTP for more info).

 reject any null sender (bounce) smtp session with more than one rcpt-to
 (based on an idea of Charles Cazabon and some code of Henning Brauer)

 updated QLDAPINSTALL (more about those nasty -lresolv and ld.so problems)

 beautified the output of the recieved line (added an additional linebreak)

 Add a precedence bulk header when we forward a message to more than one
 recipient. So auto-reply programs at the recipients will not answer such
 mails. A message forwarded to more than one recipient is now considered
 a mailing list email.

 Add an external TODO processor program. This moves the queue todo processing
 out of qmail-send to avoid the silly qmail syndrome with high injection rates
 (see EXTTODO for more info). Enable with -DEXTERNAL_TODO in Makefile.

NEWS for 20011001 stuff:

 added a variation of Henning Brauer's alternate mailhost patch.
 For more info: mailto:<qmail-ldap-get.5350@qmail-ldap.org>

 added a variation of Henning Brauer's dash-ext patch. The main
 difference is the way it handels the extensions.
 Example lookup scheme:
   aaaa-bbbb-cccc@domain.tld
   aaaa-bbbb-CATCHALL@domain.tld
   aaaa-CATCHALL@domain.tld
   CATCHALL@domain.tld
 where CATCHALL is replaced with the value of LDAP_CATCH_ALL defined
 in qmail-ldap.h. If CATCHALL is set to "default" instead of the standart
 "catchall" it is allmost stock qmails behaviour.
 The dash-ext stuff can be turned on with the -DDASH_EXT option in Makefile.

 some rewrite of qmail-ldaplookup. See qmail-ldaplookup -h.

 Makefile bug fixed, spawn.c was compiled without -DDEBUG. Not in 0802i.

 Changes in qldap-ldaplib.*:
  added qldap_open to open the ldap connection
  added qldap_close to close the ldap connection
  renamed ldap_lookup to qldap_lookup
 Now it is possible to use one ldap (TCP) connection for multiple queries, so
 the connection overhead with DASH_EXT is drastically reduced.

 new debug/log handling. In qmail-lspawn the debug output is no 
 longer added to bounce mails.

 bug fix in the cleaned up NS-MTA code.

 bugfix in catchall search string generation. Hopefully the last one.

 bugfix in qmail-ldaplookup (ldap_value_free). Thanks to Sascha Gresk.

 better handling of deliverymode in qmail-lspawn.c

NEWS for 20010501 stuff:

 bugfix in qmail-local.c by Mark Belnap. Problems with deliverymode reply.

 disallow null passwords in auth_pop and auth_imap.

 added RBLONLYHEADER logging control file and variable. With this it will
 no longer reject a mail upon a RBL match but it will mark it with a "X-RBL:"
 header.

 major cleanup in digest_* and base64 to make the code more djb style.
 Minor cleanup in some other files. compatibility.h is no longer needed. YES!

 string fix in digest_md5.c (NS_MTA handling)

 bugfix in catchall search string generation.

 bugfixes in maildir++ support. Thanks to Franky Van Liedekerke.

 bugfixes in qmail-reply

 new attribute qmailAccountPurge for automatic purging of maildirs from
 deleted accounts

NEWS for 20010301

 added 0.0.0.0 patch

 some fixes for misc. stuff from Chris Noe
  - with DEBUGLEVEL set, the default ldapGID is printed incorrectly
  - The line above says 'without trailing slash' but the example has one :)
  - Permanet -> Permanent
  - Programm -> Program
  - fix qmail-lspawn 'Out of memory' error when attempting local delivery
    to a nonexistant user.

 fix for qmail-reply.c from Jamie Blondin
  - handle precedence flag in the right way

 fix for qmail.schema mailReplyText from David E. Storey

 fix for ldaptimeout to just defer message delivery instead of bouncing
 sometimes

NEWS for 20010201:

 fix for ldapobjectclass bugfix

 beautyfied qmail-reply.c. Now it should handel most messages in a correct
 and nice way.

 bugfix for the new ldapobjectclass and ldaptimeout stuff

 bugfix in maildir++.c: algorithm has ignored all subdirs except .Trash

NEWS for 20010101:

 introduced ~control/objectclass to limit the ldap search to a specific
 ldap objectclass as suggested in some recommended procedures.

 bugfix in maildir++:
    files with sizes containig 0 or 9 where claclculated wrong
    if only one of C or S type where declared the quota of the other was ignored

 changed ALIASEMPTY in qmail-ldap.h from /dev/null to |sh -c "cat > /dev/null"
 direct writing to /dev/null resulted in a soft error. This shell call does the
 same without an error.

 introduced ~control/ldaptimeout to limit the time and ldap search might
 take until the delivery attempt is being deferred and tried again later.
 The default is 30 seconds.

 works fine with OpenLDAP 2.x (2.0.7).

 included the OpenLDAP 2.x LDAPv3 Schema definition file created by
 David E. Storey. This version is based on the original work by David
 but modified quite a lot by Andre. Also qmail-ldap has got it's own
 offcially IANA assigned OID.

NEWS for 20001201:

 cluster loop protection enhanced, now also the users mailaddress is added:
     Delivered-To: CLUSTERHOST host.name.as.in.control.me users@e-mail.addr

 new maildir++ quota algorithm implemented. This one is simpler and should
 therefor work much better. NOTE: The code was not tested under havy load.

 major enhancements in qmail-reply.c. Fixed a bug that could crash qmail-reply
 if a bad mail was sent. The output of qmail-reply was also beautified.

 introduced MAXRCPTCOUNT to limit the maximum number of rcpt to's in one session.

 introduced RBL support to check the senders IP against a number of RBL's, see
 ~control/rbllist.

 documented ~control/relaymailfrom to allow relaying based on the senders
 mail address.

 documented LOGLEVEL and DENYMAIL environment variables to qmail-smtpd.

NEWS for 20001013:

 possible fix for newer gcc. Problems with va_arg and unsigned chars. 
 I don't have such a new gcc, so I don't know if this fixes the problem.

 bug fix for the problem mentioned by Aleksander Dzierzanowski (mail to deleted
 mailfiles bounce if there is a quota set).

 cluster loop protection added. Now it should be impossible that mail loop
 forever if the cluster was badly configured. It works via the Delivered-To line
 and uses something like this: 
     Delivered-To: CLUSTERHOST host.name.as.in.control.me

 fixed multiple problems with suns cc.

 fixed multiple problems and bugs in TLS support.

 fixed a bug introduced with the bitmask support for debug outputs.

 cleanup at different locations to respect the signedness of variables

 added bitmask support for debug outputs, so DEBUGLEVEL=3 will print error and
 warnings but DEBUGLEVEL=2 only warnings. Note: init_debug's 2nd argument has
 changed, it's now a binary mask that is binary anded with the debuglevel. 
 e.g.  to disable PASSWD outputs use something like -1^256 as 2nd argument.

 added some defines for better testing:
   use -DPORT_SMTP="alternate smtp port", -DPORT_LDAP="alternate ldap port" and
       -DPORT_QMQP="alternate qmqp port" to change those ports.

NEWS for 20000701 patch:

 if the LDAP server is down put the message back into the queue instead of
 bouncing

 correct spelling errors in many files

 forcing forwardonly and ldaponly when neither LDAP_MAILSTORE nor LDAP_HOMEDIR
 is defined

 bugfixes in hier.c and install-big.c to install qmail-ldaplookup with correct
 0700 permission, as told in the QLDAPINSTALL file

 bug fix in checkpassword.c and qmail-ldaplookup.c with wrong index to the 
 LDAP args array. Thanks to Ricardo Cerqueira

 small bug fix in qmail-ldaplookup, fixed a wrong output.

 added possible connection less LDAP support. Untested because slapd does not
 support cladp until now. To turn it on use -DUSE_CLDAP as LDAPFLAGS

NEWS for 20000601 patch:

 update of the QLDAP* files

 bug fix in maildir++.c and qmail-local.c, now quota_add should add the correct 
 size of the mail. Until now only the message without DTLINE and RPLINE was 
 sized

 bugfixes in "empty file list :)"


NEWS for 20000501 patch (and some also for 20000401):
 
 Add the new control files and their meaning to qmail-showctl
 You can use qmail-showctl to check your setup.

 added new tool qmail-ldaplookup with this program you can check the ldap
 db entries. Similar to the old checkpassword with debug support.
 Usage: qmail-ldaplookup {-m mailaddress | -u userid [passwd]}
 NOTE: because this tool could show critical data (like the hashed passwd)
       it is installed with mode 000 (no rights for anybody)
       You should only give root the permission to start it.

 new mailMessageStore/homeDirectory handling.
 Because a lot of people requested it and because I was also unhappy with it
 I have rewritten/enhanced the mailMessageStore handling.
 Now the homedir and aliasempty are set via both 
 mailMessageStore (LDAP_MAILSTORE) and homeDirectory (LDAP_HOMEDIR).
  It works like this:
    IF LDAP_HOMEDIR exists it is used as $HOME (qmail-locals 3rd ARGV)
      IF also LDAP_MAILSTORE exists LDAP_MAILSTORE is used as aliasempty
        (last ARGV of qmail-local)
      ELSE (no LDAP_MAILSTORE ) use the aliasempty specified 
        in /var/qmail/rc or similar
      FI
    ELSE IF LDAP_MAILSTORE exists but no LDAP_HOMEDIR exists
      IF LDAP_MAILSTORE is absolute use LDAP_MAILSTORE as 
        $HOME and use standard aliasempty
      ELSE (LDAP_MAILSTORE not absolute) use control/ldapmessagestore as
        prefix to LDAP_MAILSTORE and use this as $HOME and use std. aliasempty
    ELSE neither LDAP_MAILSTORE nor LDAP_HOMEDIR exists
      use ~alias as $HOME and ALIASDEVNULL as aliasempty 
    FI
  
  NOTE: the case neither LDAP_MAILSTORE nor LDAP_HOMEDIR is a bit special
        ~alias is installed as root.qmail mode 02755 (rwxr-sr-x) so no user
        can write to this directory. ALIASDEVNULL is defined in qmail-ldap.h
        normally /dev/null can be used (forward-only and ldaponly will be forced
        in the next release) or a special alert tool can be used 
        ("|/var/qmail/bin/myalerttool")
  NOTE2: if you use "homeDirectory" and "mailMessageStore" in an incompatible 
        way and you want the old behavior back define LDAP_HOMEDIR in 
        qmail-ldap.h as an nonexistent ldap db field like noHomeDirectory.

 new check algorithm, I think it's faster and better.
 Have a look at check.c. At the end of the file there is a array with all
 ASCII chars (7bit). You can allow or deny char by adding:
  DENY_ALL:   always deny this char
  ALLOW_ALL:  always allow this char
  ALLOW_USER: allow this char for username checks (chck_user)
  DENY_USER:  deny this char for username checks (chck_user)
  ALLOW_PATH: allow this char for path checks (chck_path)
  DENY_PATH:  deny this char for path checks (chck_path)
  ALLOW_PROG: allow this char for program checks (chck_prog)
  DENY_PROG:  deny this char for program checks (chck_prog)
  NOT_FIRST:  deny this char at the beginning of a string
  SPACE:      alias to ALLOW_PROG
  PARANOIA:   deny most shell special chars like '|' or '*' for program checks
              can be turned on or of in qmail-ldap.h
  Example:
   /* 7  \007 ^G */ DENY_ALL, /* deny control chars */
   /* 45 '-'     */ ALLOW_ALL|NOT_FIRST, /* allowed but not first */
   /* 47 '/'     */ ALLOW_ALL&DENY_USER, /* allowed only for path and prog */
   /* 58 ':'     */ ALLOW_PROG|ALLOW_PATH, /* like before */
 
  As you can see ALLOWs have to be ORed together whereas DENYs have to be ANDed
  NOT_FIRST has to be ORed and PARANOIA has to be ANDed.

 getcwd and chdir no longer used in qldap-ldaplib.c init_ldap function. 

 changed the connection forwarding under pop and imap. Now it should work 
 correctly, or at least better then before ;-)

 major cleanup in maildir++ support (mainly maildir++.c)
 
 bugfixes in qmail-lspawn.c, qmail-reply.c and checkpassword.c
 

NEWS for previous releases:

 Added new debug facility that is usable for the auth tools and qmail-lspawn.
 The debug-level can now be changed at runtime and everything gets logged via
 splogger or any other logger connected to stderr of the execution chain.
 You can set the debug level easily with the DEUBUGLEVEL environment variable.

 Created a new auth tool for pop3 and imap. The old checkpassword is not 
 needed anymore. The new programs are auth_pop and auth_imap.
 To have the possibility to compare cleartextpasswords (password how are 
 stored clear text in ldap) define CLEARTEXTPASSWORD. Because this setting
 is a security disaster it is normally off. All other modes (hashed MD4, MD5,
 SHA and the standard DES crypt) are not affected.
 
 Rewritten qmail-lspawn and the auth tools. Both programs use now the same 
 debug and ldap functions, which are now moved to new files (qldap-*).
 The complete ldap lookup is now more flexible, so you can easier add your 
 special stuff.

 The qmailUser ldap field and the corresponding conf file are no longer used,
 they have been replaced with the uid field.

 Added maildir++ support, this means especially better quota support via the
 maildir++ maildirsize file. For more info have a look at courier-imap
 http://www.inter7.com/courierimap/

 Added signal-handler for qmail-lspawn, now with a SIGHUP the qmail-lspawn
 parent process reloads the his settings ( via the ~control files )

 Added cluster support, use -DQLDAP_CLUSTER for enabling.

 Removed PWOPTS=-DLOOK_UP_PASSWD because it was only for checkpassword
 and with ldaplocaldelivery you get the same result on the fly.

 Few minor bugfixes (qmail-qmqpd.c, qmail-qmtpd.c, receive.c)

 Updated QLDAPINSTALL and added new QLDAPNEWS because QLDAPINSTALL was
 getting to long.

 Changed the make process, now with the make setup check also the qmail-ldap
 parts are build and installed. Have fun ...

 Few minor bugfixes (accountStatus, AUTO_MAILDIRMAKE)

 Hack in the LDAP search filter escape function due to a bug in most LDAP
 servers. Instead of escaping the wildchars we replace them with '_' as 
 long as -DLDAP_ESCAPE_BUG is present. (see Makefile)

 a catch all mail for one domain system is now available. The default
 catchall account is "catchall@domain.com". You can change that to any
 other sting in qmail-ldap.h at compile time. LDAP wildcards are not
 allowed.
 Due to a bug in the LDAP servers wildcards escaping does not work, so pay
 attention.

 rewritten qmail-locals qldap code, now supports better support for different 
 dotModes. There are also some new settings.

 fixed some old bugs in qmail-local

 fixed already some bugs in new qmail-local code ;-)

 added a log facility to qmail-lspawn.

 added some experimental -extension support in qmail-lspawn.

 Added a headerfile qmail-ldap.h where all parameters are set.
 This includes some changes in qmail-local.c qmail-lspawn.c and checkpassword.c

 qmail-lspawn checks no longer for "correct" mailaddresses, now the possible
 mailaddress is escaped ('(', ')', '*') before added to the search filter.

 all the stuff that was fixed in the subpatches. (XXX double check that)
 
 Added some compile options in the Makefile for easier configuration (see 5.)

 Added Christopher K. Davis' patch to handle oversized dns packets.

 Added Chris Johnson's <cjohnson-qmail@palomine.net> tarpitting patch.

 Added qmail-quotawarn and qmail-reply for better handling of quota-warnings
 and auto reply

 deliveryMode is now a comma separated list see LDAP PARAMETER FIELDS

 Fixed a few things in qmail-local

 Supports OpenLDAP now

 WARNING: {SHA1} changed to {SHA} according to the standard

 Integrated Lindsay Haisley update to Rask Lambertsen's excellent
 antispam patch for qmail v1.01, based on Lionel Widdifield's patch.
 Please read ANTISPAM for more information.

 checkpassword now supports the password format used by Netscape
 Mailserver pre-3.0 and Software.com's Post.Office (NS-MTA-MD5).
 That string is hex encoded, the first 32 Octets are the MD5 hashed
 password and the second 32 Octets are the salt to the MD5 function.

 Added automatic homedir and maildir maker to qmail-local.
 This can be enabled with ~control/dirmaker

 qmail-smtpd does logging now. This can be set by an environment variable
 in tcpserver: LOGLEVEL="X". "0" or not present = no logging, "1" = fatal
 errors, "2" = connection setup and warnings, "3" = verbose.

 Added fix for qmail-pop3d stat command bug found by Aaron Nabil
 <nabil@spiritone.com>.

 checkpassword compiled with QLDAPDEBUG now does complete LDAP debugging.
  Usage: ./checkpassword POPLogin POPPassword

 digest computes MD4, MD5, RMD160 and SHA passwords (compatible to Netscape)
  Usage: ./digest POPPassword

 solved a problem on big endian machines that caused wrong SHA, MD5, MD4, 
 RMD160 passwords. (Added an endian testprogram to solve those probs)
 
 added a working version of the "MAKE_NETSCAPE_WORK" patch under qmail-pop3d.
 The download bar should now work correctly.
 
 Fixed the bugs in qmail-lspawn. Changed stralloc_catb to stralloc_cat. 
 Thanks to Franky Van Liedekerke <franky.van.liedekerke@telenet.be>
 

